Creating a Firewise Defensible Space around Homesteads 
ASSESS YOUR PROPERTY! 

Use the checklist below to assess the fire hazards around your home, and look at what you can do to reduce your risk this fire season. 

FIREWISE COMMUNITIES SOUTH AFRICA is introducing a concept to farmers, rural landowners and wildland / urban interface dwellers that aims to reduce the risk of 
damage to structures and homes during a wildland fire.  In collaboration with the Firewise USA programme and based upon research done in the USA, Firewise 
Communities SA is working to get landowners pro-actively protecting their properties by reducing fire hazards in the area immediately around structures as well as preparing
mitigation plans that will assist fire suppression in the event of a wildfire. 
 
If a home is built in a fire - prone area, then the owner should take a serious look at being firewise, because at some stage a wildland fire will likely endanger the property.  
Ideally, a  fire should be able happen as a natural event without firefighters needing to place their lives on the line to protect a property. The structure  is designed, positioned 
The structure  is designed, positioned and maintained in such a way that the fire will go around it, and measures are in place to protect it against ignition from flying embers. 
This sounds far fetched, but it isn’t! 

Use the checklist below to assess the area immediately around structures on your farm or smallholding, then reassess once you have taken simple, affordable steps to 
eeduce risks and hazards.

Aim for 65 points or less!!  
  

Make sure there is a clear area in the immediate vicinity of the structure.  
10metres is the very minimum. More is better.  This doesn’t mean bare ground, but that there is not fuel to feed the fire, allowing it to run along the ground or from bush to bush. 
Remove lower branches of trees so that creeping ground fire cannot reach the fuel above.  Open up spaces so that tree crowns don’t touch.  Plant fleshy species such as Aloes 
and succulents in the zone closest to the structure. Well watered lawn is a good firebreak, as is gravel. Keep ‘ladder fuels’ – fences, creepers, woodpiles -away from the walls 
of the structure.  Don’t let branches overhang the roof. Before the fire season, clean up leaf litter and dry material that has accumulated under trees. 

Take a good look at your roof
According to the research done by USA specialist, Jack Cohen, it’s the “little things” that cause homes to ignite. Most homes that burn down ignite after the main fire has passed 
over, not from the radiant heat that they are exposed to during the main fire, provided that there is a reasonably clear zone in the immediate area around the structure. Flying 
embers that accumulate in the nooks and crannies are most often the culprits.  The roof is the most exposed area.  The remedies are often simple and inexpensive. Check for 
loose or lifting roof tiles and any place where windblown embers can accumulate. Box in eaves. Close any gaps between corrugated roofing and the roof structure.  
A non –flammable roofing material is always less risky. 

Keep gutters clean of leaf litter. When the fire is approaching, block downpipes and fill gutters with water. 
Apply fire retardant to thatch, and re-apply when necessary.  A sprinkler system with an independent water supply also helps, but make sure you can depend on the water and 
electricity supply as these often go down during a wildfire. 

Be prepared 
Fit fine mesh to airvents. 
Clean out dry vegetation from under decks and apply fire retardants to wooden decking.
Keep a special set of buckets, hosepipe, a fire beater, sacking, stout shoes, long sleeved cotton or woolen clothing, long pants and head covering all together in a fireproof 
place [inside the house!] in case of ember attack.  
An independent water source such as a swimming pool or rainwater tank is invaluable. Electricity is often the first thing that goes down, so an electrically driven borehole can’t 
be depended upon and municipal water pressure is needed by municipal firefighters, so there is often a drop in pressure. 
Don’t keep large quantities of flammable liquids on the property. 
Make sure your driveway is clear and wide enough to take a fire tender. 
Properties should have a number and address prominently displayed at the roadside so that emergency services can find you if you call for help. 
Reflective numbers are best under smoky conditions!

If you choose or are ordered to evacuate;
Have a checklist prepared and make sure the family knows what to do when fire approaches. Remember pets. Don’t wait until the last minute – leave early – it is much safer.  
Close all windows. If drapes are heavy, close them, but if lightweight, open them as they may ignite from radiant heat. 
Fill the bath and buckets before you go. 
Leave lights on inside the house so that firefighters can see whether there is still power and can check inside for people. 
Remove wooden garden furniture to a safe distance from the home, or put it inside.
Open all gates so that horses and other stock animals can get away and firefighters can get in. 
If you have a ladder, leave it out on the ground [ Not against the house!] so that firefighters can gain quick access to the roof.  
Return as soon as firefighters give the all clear.
Systematically work around the structure and check for smouldering embers.