TEN GOLDEN RULES TO ADHERE TO.
1) Make effective firebreaks on your property borders.
This protects your property and prevents fires from spreading to neighbouring properties.
2) Warn neighbours if you plan to burn firebreaks.
Use a written notice to inform neighbours of your intentions.
3) Plan your firebreak programme with your neighbours.
Get your neighbour’s approval of your plan of action. If neighbours cannot reach an agreement, the local
magistrate may act as an arbiter. Their ruling will then be binding for both landowners.
4) Insist on your neighbour’s presence when firebreaks on boundary belts are being made.
This will ensure that all parties take responsibility for any eventualities. If a fire occurs on a property and poses
a threat to people, animals, or property, any person may enter the property and take reasonable measures to
prevent the fire from spreading or extinguish it. These measures may even include setting fire to crops or
additional firebreaks.
5) Ensure that weather conditions are suitable for burning firebreaks.
You could consider burning firebreaks at night when weather conditions are usually more favourable. Check
the Fire Danger Rating and regulations for your region.
6) Burn firebreaks early.
Burning restrictions are enforced in certain regions—ensure that you are aware of them.
7) Do not light fires in the open air if you cannot control them.
Ensure that you have enough help and equipment to manage all eventualities. Lighting a fire within a road
reserve, except in a designated fireplace, is prohibited under the National Veld and Forest Fire Act No. 101 of
1998.
8) You are responsible for preventing fires from spreading to neighbouring properties.
If a fire spreads, it can cause extensive damage, and the landowner from where the fire originates may be held
liable for damages.
9) Do not leave a fire unguarded or unattended before it is properly extinguished.
Unexpected winds can reignite cinders.
10) According to the National Veld and Forest Fire Act No. 101 of 1998, carelessness with fires is considered
a criminal offence.